---
layout: post
title: Blazor - What and Why
sub-title: A walkthrough of what to expect from a Blazor Application
img: blazor-logo.png
keywords: blazor,client,server,.net core,core,dotnet,json,web,rest,api,development
---

Blazor is a new web framework that changes what is possible when building web apps with .NET. Blazor is a clientside web UI framework based on C# instead of JavaScript and with Blazor, you can write your client-side logic and UI components all in C#. The resulting application can be compiled into .NET assemblies and then run directly in the browser using a new open web standard called WebAssembly. Alternatively, Blazor can run your .NET UI components on the server and handle all UI interactions fluidly over a real-time connection with the browser. When run on the server, Blazor enables full-stack web development with .NET. Blazor builds on the foundations of .NET Core to providea modern and high performance web development experience.

# Why 

Blazor promises to:
<ul>
    <li>Create rich interactive UIs using C# instead of JavaScript.</li>
    <li>Share server-side and client-side app logic written in .NET.</li>
    <li>Render the UI as HTML and CSS for wide browser support, including mobile browsers.</li>
</ul>

As a .Net Developer, you would probably prefer to write C# all the time instead of doing a bunch of context-switching between JavaScript and C#. Blazor gives us this opportunity. On top of that, you will be able to share code between backend and frontend given one of the hosting models

# What

Blazor apps can be hosted in one of the following ways:
<ul>
    <li>Client-side in the browser on WebAssembly.</li>
    <li>Server-side in an ASP.NET Core app.</li>
</ul>

Learn to build a Blazor Server Application on top of a RESTful API for a book store’s database using ASP.NET Core 3.1 API, Entity Framework, the Repository Pattern [End to End ASP.NET Core 3.1 API and Blazor Development](https://bit.ly/core-api-website)

### Client-side

Blazor WebAssembly apps execute directly in the browser on a WebAssembly-based .NET runtime. In this mode, Blazor apps function similarly to front-end JavaScript frameworks like Angular or React.

#### PROs
<ul>
    <li>No server-side dependency, it works stand alone in the browser like a static site</li>
    <li>Client takes on more responsibility and does all the work</li>
</ul>

#### CONs

<ul>
    <li>Restricted by the capabilities and features of the browser</li>
    <li>Client needs to support WebAssembly and capable hardware and software that supports WebAssembly</li>
    <li>The size of payload of the app is bigger and thereby it takes longer to load the app</li>
</ul>

### Server-side

In this hosting model approach, we have two different processes: one that tends to components and one that tends to UI updates. In this model, the components are run on the Server and not client-side like the former hosting model. So for changes to reach the Server and thereby the components, there needs to be a real-time connection. This is accomplished through WebSockets and SignalR. It is pretty much built-in and no additional configuration is required. 

#### PROs
<ul>
    <li>This model is much smaller and the app loads faster</li>
    <li>This runs on the server and can take full advantage of existing tooling and debugging</li>
    <li>This model can use full .Net, can use any .Net Core compatible .Net APIs</li>
</ul>

#### CONs
<ul>
    <li>Potential latency since every interaction is a network call</li>
    <li>No Offline mode given the dependency on the server </li>
</ul>

Learn how to build a RESTful API and a Blazor client side application using ASP.NET Core 3.1 API, Entity Framework, the Repository Pattern in [End to End ASP.NET Core 3.1 API and Blazor Development](https://bit.ly/core-api-website)